---
layout: blogpost
title:  "Experiments in Separation of Concerns"
category: blog
feature-image: "/assets/img/___.jpg"
---
For years now (since 2011, to be precise) I've been maintaining a single online presence for all of my content.  I've separated out the interests (various solo music projects, artwork, design, and business initiatives) into individual websites, but for channels such as my Instagram feed, everything has been lumped together as a flood of disparate pieces under the assumption that having a single creator at the helm was enough to unify things.  This was fine for a time, but more and more lately, as I've been traveling/moving less and therefore more prolific in my various endeavors, I've been noticing that forcing all of this content into a single pipe felt, well... rather noisy and schizophrenic.

As it turns out, and the more I've explored this, it seems that each project I approach takes on a persona of its own, and each is different.  It became apparent that containing all of this information as a single stream was hurting the clarity of the content and it seemed likely that this would also be restricting the audience.  The more I considered it, forcing anyone interested in my electronic music, for instance, to also endure posts of vocal practice and whatever current art project I was toiling over seemed prohibitive and silly.

So after bouncing the idea around for a while, I decided that, while it would certainly entail more work, the benefit of maintaining these presences and accounts separately would have a rather significant benefit in the long run and was likely worth the effort.

Thus began the first phase of this experiment: separating one of my most active feeds (Instagram) into separate business accounts for each of my endeavors.  As it turns out, there were some unforeseen benefits to this which I will explain a bit later.  First, it's important to understand the way Instagram recently rearranged itself in regard to its account structure.

While it is certainly possible for a single user to sign up for multiple accounts (this was my approach at first before I understood the nature of IG's business accounts) this is discouraged and the software seems to make this as irritating as possible to manage.  For instance, there is a 'bug' that appears to have existed for quite some time wherein the mobile app will continually log the user out when multiple, unassociated accounts are logged in simultaneously.  In my experience this happens as often as every time the app is closed, to, at the very least, every time the device switches networks (either from wi-fi to cellular data, or from one wi-fi network to another).  This, as I will explain later, seems to be resolved by maintaining a single point of contact for all accounts.  It appears that if Facebook can verify all accounts tie back to an individual user, this bug magically goes away, or at least this has been my experience. And since it took about 24 hours to rectify itself, I have a sneaking suspicion that there may be some type of back-end verification occurring and that this is not a bug at all, but rather an intentional operation of the software to keep users from loading up on accounts.  Facebook loves their data, and the more they can reliably tie activities to an individual user, the more 'honest' that data will be.  Again, I have no hard evidence that this is the case, but all signs seem to point in that direction.

So, given that multiple user accounts appears to be discouraged, what, then, is the solution? That answer lies in Instagram's recent business profile features.  Launched in May of 2016, the business tools, for purposes such as what I'm describing here, offer a lot of benefits over a standard user account.  But before I get into those, let me briefly explain the main differences.

First, rather than being tied to an individual email address for verification, a business profile links to a Facebook page dedicated to the business (in my case these are band and artist pages) and these pages, in turn, are linked to an individual Facebook user.  Thus, from a position of data integrity, I'm sure this serves Facebook well since it identifies all tracking data back to a single source.  On the user's side, Instagram offers fairly detailed analytics as an incentive to drive conversion.  It also offers the ability to (for a fee, of course) promote particular posts, and provides a method for contacting the business directly through their Instagram profile (in the form of a Contact button).

So, after first attempting to create separate user accounts (three in total, four if including my original account) and experiencing the maddening login 'bug,' I began to suspect that this was, in fact, not the best approach.  As a result, I looked more closely at the requirements for creating a business account and quickly realized that this may be the solution while also supplying benefits that a standard account would not offer. The app actually makes it quite easy to handle all the steps necessary for account setup (including redirecting to Facebook for the business page setup if one does not exist) and I managed to set up all three additional accounts within a matter of minutes.  Then began the hard work: porting my current timeline to the relevant destinations.

I didn't want my decision to split my account to mean that the history I had been building previously would be lost.  There wasn't much point in starting fresh when I had almost six years of relevant posts to draw from.  I also didn't want to inundate any new followers with a flood of old posts while I caught the accounts up to present day (as it turns out my impatience meant that I only mostly solved this problem in the end).  For all of these reasons I decided that it was incredibly important that I transfer all of my previous posts into the accounts *before* alerting my followers to the change.

So the next problem to solve was how exactly to do this in the least painful way possible. I am not an incredibly frequent IG poster (mostly because I was feeling the need to keep my message as 'on-brand' as possible given the variety of content I was generally posting), and therefore my six years of activity still only amounted to about 1100 posts in total.  Still, this was more than I could comfortably sort through by hand, and my first goal was to secure a method of batch downloading my old posts so I had a comfortable starting point and could move from there.  As it turns out, while services like https://vibbi.com/instaport/ exist, once you get into this volume of content (many of my recent posts are videos of audio work I've done) Vibbi fails silently (or possibly takes so long to process the feed that it's impossible to tell the difference between failing and timing out).  After allowing the service to run for a full half hour to no avail, I decided that this was not the way to go.

In the end, I wound up paying the $9.99 for the pro version of InstaSave, and manually saved all the relevant posts to my camera roll to prepare them for reposting (I luckily sprang for the 256GB version of the iPhone 7 when I purchased my last upgrade, so there were no space concerns during this process).  Due to the rather fluid interface of InstaSave, this was not as painful as it could have been.  Though the app limits you to 20 selections at a time, so I repeatedly had to make a mental note of my position in the feed such that I could return to this point again on the next pass.

With all the posts saved to my phone for reposting, I set to work repopulating my feeds.  My plan was to restore all the posts and then return to manually recreate the captions and hastags (as this part could happen at any time without disturbing any associated followers). I started first with my art account (drifting.lines) and began reposting all of my old content in the original order it appeared. Since this is apparently the type of content I post the most often (unsurprisingly, as it is the fastest for me to create) I quickly ran into a problem. I had researched whether or not there was a daily posting limit on Instagram before setting about this task as I was concerned that too many sequential posts could cause any kind of automated cap to trigger, and I wasn't sure what the repercussions of such a barrier would be (would my account be restricted? Would it be eliminated entirely?). I was reassured when multiple sources suggested that there was no limit.  However, this quickly proved false.

Upon restoring 105 photos to my feed, my posts began disappearing the instant they were uploaded.  After some googling, it appeared I had, in fact, hit an undocumented daily limit, but sources conflicted regarding how long my access would be restricted.  Frustrated, I set about restoring my other feeds, carefully monitoring my post count to ensure I didn't exceed this threshold again.

All said, this process took about 8 hours across two days, and that's without the addition of the captions back to the content.  I hadn't really planned for this part, so I approached it by continuing the work at every opportunity (on my lunch break at work, on the train to and from center city Philly, etc.). With my music accounts back up to present day, I found myself stuck, waiting for my posting limit to be released on my art account such that I could finish and alert my followers of the change.  But I grew impatient, and eventually I tired of waiting.  I decided to pull the trigger and correct the final feed as time allowed, careful not to flood any followers with old posts in the process.

I then created a consolidated post for my personal account to let my followers know of the change and waited to see what would happen.

The results have been incredibly interesting so far.

First, it would appear that my assumptions were correct in that the disparate nature of my previous feed was limiting the audience.  Only two days in, I've increased my following by 25% just by focusing the content.

Second, the response from my current followers has been enlightening.  As I suspected, many of them moved over to one or two of the new accounts, but almost no one followed all three (and a special thank you goes out to those who did, as I fully appreciate such a high level of support, though this is certainly not meant to diminish anyone else's).  Even more interestingly, some followers who had almost never interacted with my posts came along to the new content, proving that likes and comments are not necessarily indicative of reach.  And finally, the account I created for my vocal music, which I had assumed (based on previous experience) would have the smallest audience, actually has shown the highest conversion rate from my current followers thus far, and the account for my art, which I assumed would be the obvious focus showed the lowest conversion (though its audience is not smaller than the others, it simply consists of a newer group of viewers).

If you add to this the analytics I now have at my disposal for each individual post, the amount of information I have gained about the audience for my work is incredibly useful and gratifying.

To touch briefly on the tools that IG offers in terms of analytics, each individual posts tracks six metrics currently: Likes, Comments, Saved, Impressions, Reach, and Engagement.

Likes, obviously, is the number of likes the post has received. Comments is similarly self-explanatory. Saved refers to the number of users who have saved your post to a collection (the bookmark icon in the lower right). Impressions is the number of times the post has been viewed in a feed, while Reach is the number of unique users who have viewed the post.  Finally, Engagement is the number of those unique users who have liked, saved, or commented on the post.

Finally, at the profile level, if you access the analytics page (via the bar graph icon in the upper right, next to settings), you will see several additional details.  At the top is a slider displaying aggregate impressions across all posts on the account, as well as aggregate reach and profile views.  Next is a display that ranks posts in terms of top activity. Below this is analytics related to story posts (at this writing I have not posted any stories for these accounts, so I have yet to see how this data is presented). Once the account reached 100 followers, the next section displays demographic information.  And finally there is a section to track promotions and related activity.

Overall I would say that these features are incredibly well implemented, and it feels as though quite a bit of thought has gone into ensuring this functionality is both useful and very friendly to the end user. Nothing is hidden, discoverability is very high, and there are popups (via a "What does this mean?" button) that describe the functionality concisely but in a helpful way.

Thus, I'm pretty excited for this change, and I think it will continue to serve both my followers and me as I continue to move forward with this wider, yet more focused approach.

Onward!

-Jeremy
